## Determine the Shower Location and Size ##

Your home’s floor plan and space within the bathroom area will determine your shower location and size.

Shower Location
Your shower’s location within the bathroom should be planned for efficiency and privacy. Here are a few tips to help you choose the shower location within the bathroom:

Place the shower away from walls that are shared with rooms that need to be quiet, such as an office or bedroom, or plan for soundproofing.
Consider placing the shower near a window to incorporate more natural light and expand your view when using the shower.
Position the shower away from direct views of the bathroom door to increase privacy.
Shower Size
Standard shower sizes range from 30” x 30” up to 30” x 60”, but can be even larger if you are designing a custom shower. When determining the shower size, consider who the primary user is, the space needed for comfort, and any desired features.

Here are some standard shower sizes:

Small Shower: The minimum shower size allowed by International Residential Code (IRC) is 30” by 30”. This size can work if your bathroom is tight on space but may feel cramped.
Medium Shower: A better starting size for your shower is 36” by 36”. This size makes it easier to maneuver within the shower. 
Larger Shower: A spacious shower is 48” by 48” or larger. This size allows you to accommodate optional features such as a shower bench.
Walk-in Shower: A walk-in shower usually starts at 30” by 60” and may feel like its own dedicated room with many features. Common features include multiple shower heads from above and on the walls, seating and/or a lounge, a steam generator, and more.
Corner Showers: Corner showers usually have a curved or angled front and are often used if the bathroom is tight on space. Corner shower sizes typically start at 32” by 32” 
Ada-Compliant Showers: A Transfer Shower is a type of shower that makes it easy for people to move from a wheel to a shower bench or seat. ADA-compliant Transfer Showers are at least 36” by 36” and a seat must be provided within the shower area. A Roll-In shower is a barrier-free shower that a wheelchair can roll in to. ADA-compliant Roll-in showers are at least 30” by 60”.