To count as complete a theory of aesthetic value must answer two questions:

What makes aesthetic value aesthetic?
What makes aesthetic value value?
The literature refers to the first question sometimes as the aesthetic question (Lopes 2018, 41–43; Shelley 2019, 1) and sometimes as the demarcation question (van der Berg 2020, 2; Matherne 2020, 315; Peacocke 2021, 165). It refers to the second as the normative question (Lopes 2018, 41–43; Shelley 2019, 1; Matherne 2020, 315).

2.5.1 The Aesthetic Question
The prevailing answer to the aesthetic question is aesthetic formalism, the view that aesthetic value is aesthetic because objects bear it in virtue of their perceptual properties, where these encompass visual, auditory, gustatory, olfactory, and tactile properties. Aesthetic formalism rose to prominence when and because artistic formalism did, during the late 19th and early 20th centuries (see Section 5.1). Because everyone then took artistic value to be a species of aesthetic value, artistic formalism could gain prominence only by dragging aesthetic formalism in its train. But whereas artistic formalism has since fallen from favor, aesthetic formalism has held its ground. The explanation, arguably, has to do with the way aesthetic formalism honors the conceptual link between the aesthetic and the perceptual. Any adequate answer to the aesthetic question must meet what we may call the perceptual constraint, that is, it must plausibly articulate the sense in which aesthetic value is perceptual. Aesthetic formalism does this in the clearest possible terms.

Versions of aesthetic formalism come in varying strengths. Its strongest versions hold objects to have aesthetic value strictly in virtue of their perceptual properties (Bell 1958/1914; Danto 2003, 92). Weaker versions either allow objects to have aesthetic value in virtue of their non-perceptual content so long as that content expresses itself perpetually (Zangwill 1998, 71–72) or require merely that objects paradigmatically have aesthetic value in virtue of their perceptual properties (Levinson 1996, 6). All versions of aesthetic formalism struggle, one way or another, to accommodate our long-standing practice of ascribing aesthetic value to objects that do not address themselves primarily to the five bodily senses. Consider works of literature. We have been ascribing aesthetic value to them for as long as we have been ascribing aesthetic value to artworks of any kind. How might the aesthetic theorist square her theory with this practice? A first approach is simply to dismiss that practice, regarding its participants as linguistically confused, as applying terms of aesthetic praise to objects constitutionally incapable of meriting it (Danto 2003, 92). But given how extremely revisionist this approach is, we ought to wait on an argument of proportionately extreme strength before adopting it. A second approach allows that literary works bear aesthetic value, but only in virtue of their sensory properties, such as properties associated with assonance, consonance, rhythm, and imagery (Urmson 1957, 85–86, 88; Zangwill 2001, 135–140). But this approach accounts for a mere fraction of the aesthetic value we routinely ascribe to works of literature. Suppose you praise a short story for the eloquence of its prose and the beauty of its plot-structure. It seems arbitrary to count only the eloquence as a genuine instance of aesthetic value. A third approach treats literary works as exceptional, allowing them, alone among works of art, to bear aesthetic value in virtue of their non-perceptual properties (Binkley 1970, 269; Levinson 1996, 6 n.9). The difficulty here is to explain literature’s exceptionality. If literary works somehow bear aesthetic value in virtue of non-perceptual properties, what prevents non-literary works from doing the same? Moreover, to whatever degree we allow things to have aesthetic value in virtue of their non-perceptual properties, to that degree we sever the connection the formalist asserts between the aesthetic and the perceptual and so undermine our reason for adopting aesthetic formalism in the first place.

We might be forced to choose from among these three formalist approaches to literature if aesthetic formalism constituted the only plausible articulation of the sense in which aesthetic value is perceptual, but it doesn’t. Instead of holding that aesthetic value is perceptual because things have it in virtue of their perpetual properties, one might hold that aesthetic value is perceptual because we perceive things as having it. This would be a corollary of the immediacy thesis as defined in Section 1.1. If, as that thesis holds, aesthetic judgment is perceptual, having all the immediacy of any standard perceptual judgment, then aesthetic properties are perceptual, grasped with all the immediacy of standard perceptual properties. That aesthetic properties are thus perceptual is Sibley’s point in the following:

It is of importance to note first that, broadly speaking, aesthetics deals with a kind of perception. People have to see the grace or unity of a work, hear the plaintiveness or frenzy in the music, notice the gaudiness of a colour scheme, feel the power of a novel, its mood, or its uncertainty of tone. (Sibley 2001, 34, emphasis in original)
Sibley says that people have to see the grace or unity of a work and they have to feel the power of a novel. He doesn’t say that they have to see the properties in virtue of which a work has grace or unity or feel the properties in virtue of which a novel has power: the properties in virtue of which a work has grace or unity need not be perceptual and the properties in virtue of which a novel has power presumably will not be. Thus the literature problem, over which formalism stumbles, does not arise for Sibley, nor for anyone else committed to the immediacy thesis, including Shaftesbury (Cooper 1711, 17, 231), Hutcheson (1725, 16–24), Hume (1751, Section I), and Reid (1785, 760–761), among others. For the immediacy theorist, the aesthetic value we ascribe to literary works is aesthetic because we perceive literary works as bearing it.

2.5.2 The Normative Question
The prevailing answer to the normative question is aesthetic hedonism, the view that aesthetic value is value because things having it give pleasure when experienced. Aesthetic hedonism achieved prominence in the 19th century, roughly when aesthetic formalism did. Schopenhauer played a pivotal role in bringing it to prominence by reassigning disinterested pleasure from the role it had been playing in aesthetic judgment to the role of grounding aesthetic value (Schopenhauer 1818 [1969], 195–200). Bentham (1789, ch. 4) and Mill (1863 [2001]; ch. 2) arguably played larger roles by popularizing value hedonism, that is, the view that pleasure is the ground of all value. But whereas value hedonism no longer holds much sway in ethics, and Schopenhauer no longer exerts much influence in aesthetics, aesthetic hedonism has held its ground. The explanation presumably has to do with the apparent ease with which aesthetic hedonism explains why we seek out objects of aesthetic value. Any adequate answer to the normative question must meet what we may call the normative constraint, that is, it must plausibly identify what a thing’s having aesthetic value gives us reason to do. Aesthetic hedonism, locating that reason in the pleasure taken in experiencing aesthetically valuable objects, does this in the clearest possible terms.

Advocates of aesthetic hedonism include Schopenhauer 1818 [1969], Clive Bell 1914 [1958], C. I. Lewis 1946, Monroe Beardsley 1982, George Dickie 1988, Alan Goldman 1990, Kendall Walton 1993, Malcolm Budd 1995, Jerrold Levinson 1996, 2002, Gary Iseminger 2004, Robert Stecker 2006, 2019, Nick Stang 2010 and Mohan Matthen 2017. It is only quite recently that any sustained opposition to hedonism has arisen, a fact that may go some way toward explaining why hedonists, as a rule, see no need to argue for their view, opting instead to develop it in light of objections an imagined opposition might make.

Beardsley, for instance, leads with this simple formulation of hedonism:

The aesthetic value of an object is the value it possesses in virtue of its capacity to provide aesthetic gratification. (Beardsley 1982, 21).
But he then anticipates a fatal objection. Sometimes we undervalue aesthetic objects, finding them to have less value than they actually have; other times we overvalue aesthetic objects, finding them to have greater value than they actually have. The simple formulation above is consistent with undervaluation, since it is possible to take less aesthetic pleasure from an object than it has the capacity to provide, but inconsistent with overvaluation, since it is impossible to take greater aesthetic pleasure from an object than it has the capacity to provide (Beardsley 1982, 26–27). To remedy this problem, Beardsley appends a rider:

The aesthetic value of [an object] is the value [it] possesses in virtue of its capacity to provide aesthetic gratification when correctly and completely experienced (Beardsley 1982, 27, italics in original).
Suppose we refer to the italicized portion of this formulation as the epistemic qualification and the non-italicized portion as the hedonic thesis. The epistemic qualification renders the hedonic thesis consistent with overvaluation, given that you can misapprehend an object such that you take greater aesthetic pleasure from it than it has the capacity to provide when apprehended correctly and completely.

Beardsley’s version of aesthetic hedonism has served as a model for subsequent versions (Levinson 2002, n. 23); at least all subsequent versions consist of an epistemically qualified hedonic thesis in some form. Beardsley’s version, however, seems open to counter-example. Consider Tony Morrison’s Beloved, for instance, or Cormac McCarthy’s Blood Meridian. Taking pleasure from works designed to cause shock, horror, despair, or moral revulsion may seem perverse; surely, it may seem, such works do not have whatever aesthetic value they have in virtue of any pleasure they give. One way to accommodate such cases is to cast aesthetic pleasure as a higher-order response, that is, a response that depends on lower-order responses, which in some cases might include shock, horror, despair, and moral revulsion (Walton 1993, 508; Levinson 1992, 18). Another way is to broaden the field of experiences that may ground aesthetic value. Though pleasure as a rule grounds aesthetic value, in exceptional cases certain non-hedonic yet intrinsically valuable experiences—which may include horror, shock, despair, and revulsion—may also do so (Levinson 1992, 12; Stecker 2005, 12). The literature refers to this latter, broadened variety of hedonism as aesthetic empiricism; it hasn’t settled on a name for the former variety, but we may call it tiered hedonism, given the varying levels of response it takes aesthetic experience to comprise.

Yet another objection, anticipated by hedonists, holds hedonism to imply the heresy of the separable experience (Budd 1985, 125). It is a commonplace that for any object bearing aesthetic value nothing other than it can have just the particular value it has, excepting the improbable case in which something other than it has just its particular aesthetic character. The worry is that hedonism, given that it regards aesthetic value as instrumental to the value of experience, implies that for any object bearing aesthetic value something wholly other from it, such as a drug, might induce the same experience and so serve up the same value. The hedonist’s usual reply is to assert that aesthetic experience is inseparable from its object, such that for any aesthetic experience, that experience is just the particular experience it is because it has just the particular aesthetic object it has (Levinson 1996, 22–23; Budd 1985, 123–124; S. Davies 1994: 315–16; Stang 2012, 271–272).

Actual opposition to hedonism did not materialize until the present century (Sharpe 2000, Davies 2004), and most all of that during the past decade or so (Shelley 2010, 2011, 2019; Wolf 2011; Lopes 2015, 2018; Gorodeisky 2021a, 2021b). Why the opposition took so long to show up is a good question. It is tempting to think its answer resides in the obvious truth of the hedonist’s central premise, namely, that aesthetically valuable objects please us, at least in general. Anti-hedonists, however, have taken no interest in denying this premise. One useful way to think of the dialectic between hedonists and their opponents is to regard each as grasping one horn of an aesthetic version of the Euthyphro dilemma, where hedonists hold things to have aesthetic value because they please and anti-hedonists hold things to please because they have aesthetic value (Augustine 2005/389–391, De vera religione §59; Gorodeisky 2012a, 201 and 2021b, 262). Seen this way, the fact that aesthetically valuable things please tells not at all in favor of the hedonist; indeed, it is precisely this fact that the anti-hedonist thinks the hedonist cannot explain.

For instance, Wolf, in the context of an extended, nuanced case against value welfarism, argues that aesthetic hedonism cannot account for the fact that Middlemarch is a better novel than the Da Vinci Code,given that most people apparently like the latter better, presumably because it gives them greater pleasure (Wolf 2011, 54–55; see also Sharpe 2000, 326). The hedonist has a ready reply in the claim that all standard versions of hedonism are now epistemically qualified, that while most people may derive greater pleasure from the Da Vinci Code, a fully informed reader—that is, a reader who gives both texts a correct and complete reading—will not, assuming Middlemarch to be the better novel. But it’s not clear how much appeal to the epistemic qualification ultimately helps the hedonist. The anti-hedonist will want to know what best explains the fact that a fully informed reader will derive greater pleasure from Middlemarch (Wolf 2011, 55; D. Davies 2004, 258–259; Sharpe 2000, 325). Suppose we say that it owes to the fully informed reader’s grasping the superiority of Middlemarch’s structure, the higher quality of its prose, the greater subtlety and depth of its character development, and the greater penetration of the insights it affords (Wolf 2011, 55). Wouldn’t we then be saying that it owes to her grasping the greater aesthetic value of Middlemarch? Wouldn’t that be part of what a fully informed reader is fully informed about?

Of course, the hedonist may allow Middlemarch to be aesthetically better because of its superior structure, prose, character development, and insight; to allow this, from her point of view, is simply to allow that these are the elements in virtue of which a fully informed reader will derive greater pleasure. But here it would be good if the hedonist had an argument. Otherwise, the anti-hedonist will rightly wonder how it is that a correct and complete experience of Middlemarch will be an experience of every value-conferring feature of Middlemarch yet not an experience of the value conferred by those features. She will rightly wonder whether the hedonist fails to honor her own commitment to externalism about aesthetic value; she will rightly wonder, in other words, whether the hedonist fails to distinguish between a valuable experience and an experience of value, just as the internalist about aesthetic value fails to distinguish between a coherent and complete experience and an experience of coherence and completeness.

Earlier we attributed the appeal of hedonism to the apparent ease with which it explains our seeking out objects of aesthetic value. Anti-hedonists take that ease to be apparent merely. Some anti-hedonists, for instance, argue that at least some aesthetically valuable objects offer up pleasure only on condition that we do not seek it (Lopes 2018, 84–86; Ven der Berg 2020, 5–6; see also Elster 1983, 77–85). Lopes puts the point this way:

Sometimes an agent has an aesthetic reason to act and yet they could not be motivated to act out of a hedonic desire that would be satisfied by their so acting. To get any pleasure, they must act out of non-hedonic motives. Strolling through the Louvre, they happen upon the Chardins, and they look at them. So long as they do not look seeking pleasure, they get the pleasure that the paintings afford (Lopes 2018, 85–86).
Lopes’s choice of example is not arbitrary. There are particular art-critical reasons for thinking that Chardins will frustrate the hedonically motivated viewer (Fried 1980, 92; cited in Lopes 2018, 85), and Lopes is careful to claim that only “some aesthetic pleasures are essential by-products of acts motivated by other considerations” (Lopes 2018, 85). But it’s not as if Lopes’s claim is specific to Chardins. Consider again Wolf’s assertation that most readers take greater pleasure from The Da Vinci Code than from Middlemarch. If that assertion is correct, as it plausibly is, perhaps this is because (a) most readers read for pleasure, and (b) The Da Vinci Code affords pleasure to readers who read for it, whereas (c) Middlemarch withholds pleasure from such readers, affording pleasure instead on readers who read in pursuit of some non-hedonic good.

There is an apparent tension, moreover, between the hedonist’s reliance on the epistemic qualification and her claim that pleasure rationalizes our aesthetic pursuits. Consider the less-than-fully-informed reader who overvalues The Da Vinci Code and undervalues Middlemarch. The epistemic qualification is designed to allow the hedonist to explain how this might occur: such a reader takes greater pleasure from The Da Vinci Code, and less (or lesser) pleasure from Middlemarch, than she would were she fully informed. The epistemic qualification, moreover, allows the hedonist to explain why the uninformed reader has aesthetic reason not to undervalue Middlemarch: she is missing out on pleasure that would be hers if only she gave Middlemarch a fully informed reading. But the hedonist struggles to explain why the uninformed reader has reason not to overvalue the Da Vinci Code. If The Da Vinci Code gives the reader greater pleasure when she overvalues it, not only has she no aesthetic reason to be fully informed, she has aesthetic reason not to be. It therefore seems that if pleasure rationalized our hedonic pursuits, we would take ourselves to have reason to experience aesthetic objects in whatever way maximizes our pleasure. To the degree that we instead take ourselves to have reason to experience aesthetic objects completely and correctly—to the degree that we instead take ourselves to have reason to experience aesthetic objects as having the aesthetic values they in fact have—suggests that pleasure is not the aesthetic good we’re after (Shelley 2011).

But if pleasure is not the aesthetic good we’re after, what is? Part of hedonism’s perceived inevitability over the past century or so has owed to our inability even to imagine alternatives to it. If opposition to hedonism has been slow to materialize, alternatives have been slower still. To date, the only fully realized alternative to hedonism is Lopes’s network theory of aesthetic normativity, articulated and defended in his ground-breaking Being for Beauty: Aesthetic Agency and Value (2018).

Earlier we noted how Lopes challenges the hedonist on her own terms, objecting that she cannot adequately explain why we seek out objects of aesthetic value, given that aesthetic pleasure is at least sometimes an essential by-product of our seeking after something else (2018, 84–86). Lopes’s deeper challenge, however, targets the hedonist’s very terms. Aesthetic considerations rationalize a very great variety of aesthetic acts, according to Lopes: appreciating objects of aesthetic value is one such act, but so too is hanging a poster one way rather than another, selecting this book rather than that one for a book club, building out a garden this way rather than that, conserving one video game rather than another, pairing this dish with this wine rather than that one, and so on ad infinitum (2018, 32–36). If a theory of aesthetic value is to accommodate such a vast range of aesthetic acts, without singling out any one as more central than the others, it will have to conceive of aesthetic normativity as a species of some very general kind of normativity. Lopes, accordingly, conceives of aesthetic normativity as a species of the most generic form of practical normativity; that aesthetic acts ought to be performed well follows from the premise that all acts ought to be performed well for the simple reason that they are acts (2018, 135–137). As Lopes puts it: “Aesthetic values inherit their practical normativity from a basic condition of all agency—agents must use what they have to perform successfully” (2018, 135). Just which competencies an aesthetic agent may call upon to perform successfully on any given occasion depends on the particular role they happen to be playing in the particular social practice in which they happen to be performing (2018, 135). It is from the fact that all aesthetic activity necessarily takes place within the domain of some particular social practice that the network theory of aesthetic value takes its name (2018, 119).

In holding aesthetic agents to be performing the greatest variety of aesthetic acts on the greatest variety of items in coordination with one another, the network theory departs radically from hedonism. But, as Lopes himself observes, the network theory follows after hedonism in one fundamental way: inasmuch as both theories “answer the normative question but offer nothing in answer to the aesthetic question,” both “are consistent with any stand-alone answer to the aesthetic question” (2018, 48). The claim that the normative and aesthetic questions admit of stand-alone answers implies that aesthetic value is a species of the genus value in a standard species-genus relation, such that what makes aesthetic value value has no bearing on what makes it aesthetic and vice-versa. It therefore also implies that aesthetic value is not a determinate of the determinable value, such that what makes aesthetic value aesthetic is very thing that makes it value.

Do answers to the normative and aesthetic questions stand alone or stand together? If we have not yet registered the urgency of this question, perhaps that is because no one has yet fully articulated, let alone defended, a theory of aesthetic value according to which aesthetic value is a determinate form of value. Such a theory appears to be implicit, however, in Shelley 2011, Watkins and Shelley 2012, Gorodeisky and Marcus 2018, Gorodeisky 2021a, and Shelley 2022. The position common to these authors has been dubbed the Auburn view (Van der Berg 2020, 11). It answers the aesthetic question, and therein the value question, by holding an item’s having aesthetic value to rationalize its appreciation in a distinctively self-reflexive way, such that part of what you perceive when you appreciate an aesthetically valuable item is that it ought to be appreciated as you appreciating it (Shelley 2011, 220–222; Watkins and Shelley 2012, 348–350; Gorodeisky and Marcus 2018, 117–119; Gorodeisky 2021a, 200, 207; Shelley 2022, 12). The network theorist may object that the Auburn view privileges acts of appreciation as surely as hedonism does, but such an objection, from the Auburn perspective, begs the question. It is in assuming that the normative and aesthetic questions admit of stand-alone answers that the network theorist grants herself the freedom of passing on the aesthetic question, and it is in passing on the aesthetic question that she grants herself the freedom of treating each of a very great variety of aesthetic acts as equally central. It is in assuming that aesthetic value is a determinate of the determinable value, meanwhile, that the Auburnite places herself under the necessity of answering the aesthetic question, and it is in seeking an answer to the aesthetic question that she places herself under the necessity of singling out appreciation as aesthetically central. The network theorist and the Auburnite agree that the aesthetic question deserves an answer sooner or later (Lopes 2018, 46). They disagree, crucially, about whether it deserves an answer sooner rather than later.

The network theory and the Auburn view hardly exhaust the options for non-hedonic theories of aesthetic normativity: Nguyen 2019, Matherne 2020, Peacocke 2021, Kubala 2021, and Riggle 2022 all represent promising new directions. Yet every new theory of aesthetic value, hedonic or not, must follow after the network theory or the Auburn view in regarding answers to the normative and aesthetic questions as stand-alone or stand-together. A lot hangs on the decision to follow one path rather than the other. Perhaps it’s time we attend to it.