## Choose your Shower Fixtures and Features ##

The fixtures and features you choose will go a long way in determining your shower usage experience. The key step here is to evaluate your shower needs, which will help you select fixtures and prioritize features.

Here are some essential fixtures and popular features you might consider for your custom shower:

Showerhead: The showerhead is one of the most important fixtures in your shower. Showerheads come in various types, such as fixed on the wall, an overhead rain showerhead fixed to the ceiling, or a handheld showerhead on a hose (ideal for those with accessibility concerns and cleaning the shower). Smart shower heads can include LED lights, speakers, and smart-home features built into them. If the shower size is large enough, it may even include multiple shower heads, but you will want to have a professional ensure your plumbing system is equipped to handle higher water flows to the shower.
Shower Faucets: In conjunction with the showerhead, each showerhead in your shower will require a faucet to control the water flow and temperature. Shower faucets are available as either a one-handle or two-handle fixture. Single-handle faucets control both the water flow and temperature with a single lever. Double-handle faucets have separate handles for controlling hot and cold water flows, allowing for more precise temperature adjustments.  The shower faucet will almost always match the showerhead material, such as being finished in chrome, brushed nickel, matte black, and more. Additionally, the shower head and faucets will be available in various styles to match the design style of the rest of the shower and bathroom area.
Shower Drain: Another necessary shower fixture, the shower drain serves as the entry point for removing wastewater from the shower. Shower drains can be located in the center or along the edge of the shower, with the floor slightly sloping towards it. If your shower will have multiple shower heads, make sure your drain size can accommodate the water output of your shower.  Drains come in various shapes, sizes, and materials with the material ideally matching the appearance of the faucet and shower head.
Shower Niche: A shower niche is a small recess built into a shower wall for holding hygiene items. Niches can be built to any size but are generally rectangular in shape. If a niche is tall, it can contain shelves. Niches can also serve as an aesthetic focal point in the shower by using a different backing material than the sides or integrating LED lights.
Shower Bench: Shower benches are practical and stylish additions to showers that enhance safety and usability by providing a comfortable spot for sitting, bathing, shaving or placing accessories. The bench may be floating above the shower floor or a box style extending to the floor. Built-in benches can be finished with a material that matches the rest of the shower or use a different accent material that stands out. Fold-down benches are a good option for small or budget showers. IRC code requires benches to be 17” to 19” above the floor and 15” – 16” deep.
Grab Bars: Shower grab bars are safety features that provide stability and support for the occupant. The diameter is usually 1.25” – 2”, with the ideal height being 33” to 36” above the floor, and the length can range from 12” to 42” to accommodate any shower size. They can be installed vertically, horizontally, or at an angle. Additional wall framing and blocking should be designed into the wall to ensure the grab bar can be securely fastened to the wall.