## Consider the Shower Walls and Entrance ##

If you are designing a custom shower, you will need to design the walls and entrance that form the shower and separate it from the rest of the bathroom. The shower walls and entrance play a key role in determining the level of privacy the shower offers and the shower aesthetics.

First you will need to choose the shower wall type you will use and there are several options to pick from:

Glass Wall: A glass wall is a sheet of glass used for one or more shower enclosing walls. Glass walls are made from tempered glass, which is durable and shatter resistant. These walls allow light to pass through, making the shower feel bright and open and visually making small bathrooms appear larger than they are. Frosted or textured glass can be used to offer privacy. While glass shower walls are often considered modern and stylish, they require regular cleaning to prevent water spots and soap scum. Safety should be considered with glass walls – if the primary user has balance problems or if the shower will be regularly used by a child, a glass shower wall may not be the best option.
Full Height Wall: A full-height wall goes from the floor to the ceiling forming the shower enclosure. These walls are framed walls that are waterproofed and have a decorative exterior material (tile, stone, etc.). This wall construction option provides the most privacy; however, regular maintenance may be required on the chosen exterior material (grout cleaning, stone sealing, etc.).
Pony Wall: Pony walls in a shower typically consist of two different wall types – an upper and a lower section.  For example, you may have a framed wall for the lower section with a tile material covering the wall, while the upper section may be plate glass or glass block material. Pony walls of this type can offer partial privacy to the shower user while allowing the shower to maintain a spacious feel and allow natural light to enter from the adjacent room.  Pony walls can add visual interest to a bathroom but may require more maintenance and cleaning than other wall types.
Once the shower wall type is chosen you can determine the shower entrance.   

Curbless: A curbless shower entrance has no barriers between the shower and bathroom floor space. This type of entrance is ideal for those with accessibility needs while offering a seamless look that makes the bathroom appear larger. The shower floor has to be sloped towards the drain to prevent water from seeping into the bathroom area.
Curbed: A curbed shower entrance is a small barrier between the shower and bathroom, typically about 3” – 6” high. The primary function of a curb is to prevent water from seeping into the bathroom area.
Door: Shower doors provide water containment. Shower doors can be used with both curbed and curbless entrances. They come in various styles, such as hinged, sliding, and more. If using a hinged shower door, IRC code requires that the door swings outward for safety, but commonly, hinged shower doors will swing in both directions.